---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: 'September 11, 2004'
date: 2004-09-12T16:42:00.000Z
tags:
  - politics
original_url: 'https://nemorathwald.dreamwidth.org/21314.html'
userpic: ../userpics/_.jpg
---
So I just found out that yesterday was the anniversary of the September 11 attacks. May all religions fade away. It's too bad that we usually only hear Americans talking about how the highjackers' motive was hate and greed. That's nonsense. Their crime was a faith crime. Religion launched faith-based missiles against the symbols of the secular world. The churches in this country don't want to think about what they have in common with Al Qaeda supporters-- the sin of faith. Granted, there's a tremendous difference in degree, but not a difference in kind. I was at the credit union service center branch on the morning of September 11, 2001, and overheard somebody saying, "there was a terrorist attack this morning. I think they flew some planes into some buildings or something." I remember hoping, at the time, that it would be covered on the news because I was curious if it was really so similar to Jerry Bruckheimer movies. By the time I got to work the radio had given me the answer to my question. My employment was in a church at that time, and the pastor got me started on making a quick handout for an impromptu prayer service. We set up a TV and watched the footage of the attacks. I remember delivering the handout to the sanctuary and being surprised at how many had shown up that afternoon. I knew that they could not all have known someone who had died, so I wondered why they needed emotional comfort. A thousand people are violently killed every day, just like what's happening now in Sudan. To me the 9/11 crisis had lasted about two hours and we had clearly never been in personal danger. Little did I know the real personal danger to result from September 11 would unfold in our own political system here at home.

## Comments

---

**[ext_2143956](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_2143956)** on Sep. 12, 2004 11:41 AM

here here. well put.

---

**[ext_528962](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_528962)** on Sep. 12, 2004 1:01 PM — *Danger, Will Robinson*

It is very sad how our government is playing everybody's fears to their advantage, although those fears are not unwarranted. It's actually suprising that something of this nature has not happened earlier. We Americans live in our little box and never even think of the world out there intruding. The American people should be more afraid of China and Korea with their nukes than small organized terrorist attacks. But they never even think about it. This world is just a very dangerous place. All anyone can do is just live one day at a time and what happens, happens.

---

**[ext_362572](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_362572)** on Sep. 12, 2004 9:31 PM

Americans really don't have any comprehension of war's destruction. When you consider that there there hasn't been any significant miltary action on American soil since the civil war, it's easy to see how fear can be played up to the American public. I should show you some photos in a picture book I have of London that were taken back during the German Blitz in 1940. The destruction is extensive and horrific. Every night for several \*months\* the German Luftwaffe would fly in over London from the south, turn east just about over my father's house, and start dropping bombs over central and east London. An occaisional unexploded bomb is still being found after all these years. This year is the 60th anniversay of the German deployment of the V-2 rocket against England. This was after launching a primitive cruise missle, the V-1 "doodle bug" for the previous couple years. And as a point of scale, the amount of ordnance that was dropped by both sides during WWII is dwarfed when you consider what was dropped on Vietnam in the 60's and early 70's, which again was dwarfed by what we've dropped on Iraq and Afganistan. I'd like to just laugh at how the US government is running around like a disturbed ant heap over such a relatively minor event (yes it was a tragedy. People died. Please get over it.) Unfortunately the US is causing so much damage in the world in retaliation that it's just not funny.

---

**[ext_21159](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_21159)** on Sep. 13, 2004 5:13 AM

My statement was in reference to the USA Patriot Act. It's like in the comic strip Sinfest, where the candidate was endorsed by the devil. He pointed and said "Look behind you, terrorists!" and ran. As to how much damage the US is causing to the world, I can't say. It's clear in retrospect that the war was not justified. But at the time the war began, the moral calculus was beyond me, at least from a utilitarian standpoint. I'm surprised that we haven't found WMDs. What bothers me very much is the resurgence of patriotism (read: jingoism). Our elections are watched very closely overseas, and in Europe, particularly Germany, they've learned from personal experience to view nationalism as the creepy brainwashing it is. It's disturbing to see election nominees from any country wrapping themselves in a flag.

---

**[ext_362572](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_362572)** on Sep. 13, 2004 7:07 AM

I'd have to find the exact Ambrose Bierce quote from "The Devils Dictionary", as I can't remember if it was for "patriot" or "nationalist", with the definition stating that "it is said that wrapping oneself in the flag is the last act of the scoundrel. I submit that it is the first." But my point was an observation that America is behaving like a coddled child who someone managed to land a lucky punch on, whereas the rest of the world is used to getting stuck in a street brawl and is used to taking a series of punches on occaision, and doesn't immediately go screaming bloody murder.

---

**[ext_199178](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_199178)** on Sep. 13, 2004 7:25 AM

Hrmmm... What to say about this. There is the PC version where I should say "oh it's such a tragedy and I should be mad because it's the right thing to be doing" Or I can say what I really feel and that is that; Yes, Sep. 11th did happen. Yes I'm mad/sad that we had something so horrible done to us and many families and friends lost loved ones. But on the global scale it really isn't that tragic. Goin on the point that MUCH worse has happened to us and other countries I can't be that sad. Also on the fact that we have that many people die a day. It just isn't in such a concetrated area. It's global so we don't pay as much attention. I'm more upset about the after effects that have happened due to this attack then the actual attack. Maybe this makes me unpatriotic to some people. Maybe it seems like I don't care. But the truth is that I am patriotic and I do care. It's just not something I feel we should dwell on and mourn every year through the television and media. \*sighs\* Enough from me for now.
