---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: The Backlash
date: 2004-11-16T16:49:00.000Z
tags:
  - atheism
  - christian
  - authoritarianism
  - christianity
  - religion
  - secular
original_url: 'https://nemorathwald.dreamwidth.org/28011.html'
userpic: ../userpics/_.jpg
---
Lately I've been taking my discontent with America's religious climate and hitching it to the wagon of the recent election in the hopes of waking up politically-motivated people to become motivated about religion, so that they can work on the disease and not the symptoms. Now, however, there is a backlash, because there are two kinds of Christians. First there are the majority of Christians, among whom are many of my good and worthy friends, who pray a lot, and claim to follow some vague idea of "Jesus" which they possibly got from a painting of a robed fellow with long hair holding a baby sheep. If a person claims to follow Jesus, and Jesus transforms into whatever their idea of goodness happens to be, is such a person "following" in any meaningful sense? They follow themselves. I'm glad they do so, but if I were to refer to this as Christianity, words would become meaningless noises. Second are the ones who actually read and follow the Christian scriptures, such as the American Family Association and Bob Jones University and the Concerned Women of America and other politically active Christian Supremacist groups, and the huge grassroots of congregations who they motivate with press releases, sermons, and letters so extreme they actually deserve phrases like "American Mullahs." I know that they are following the actual book, because because I grew up reading, believing and obeying it until several years ago. I and other informed secularists then apply phrases like "American Mullahs" to those who read, believe and obey the literal bible, including all the cancerous Christian Supremacism found within. Then liberal/nominal Christians, utterly ignorant of what is actually in their own religion's teachings except for a few warm huggy sound bites like: "love thy neighbor," and silly self-contradictory nonsense like: "judge not lest ye be judged," call us intolerant for criticizing faith. What's worst is that even non-religious liberals join them in this. The cultural attitude at the root of so many problems is unchanged as a sacred cow, and from there proceeds business as usual in America. The reason this happens is that there exists fashionable nonsense among liberals and progressives that there is no such thing as a right or wrong truth claim if somebody slaps the label of faith on it. This is found nowhere in the Christian bible, which only uses the "get away with faith free card" to exempt itself at the expense of everyone else. Then they make the claim that opposition to faith is also faith, because there exists no evidence one way or another for paradoxical mysteries, which is **BULL SHIT**. This claim that every stance is a retreat to faith is called irrationalism. At least the postmodernist irrationalists differ from the absolutist irrationalists, in that there is no winner or loser. However, they seem to oppose Christian or Islamic political supremacism _not_ because they present truth claims about religion that are wrong, but because they present any at all. This is self-defeating because everyone will ultimately present truth claims anyway regardless of our pretenses otherwise. For instance, if you claim everything is just faith, than you are giving me a pass to say by faith that you're wrong. You can't do diddly squat about it unless you're willing to say that one faith is better than another and I should stop having mine. Which undercuts your ability to say I can't tell you to stop having yours. Of course I'm just playing along with the idea that not having faith is the same as having it. Naturally there is a difference. I act like these issues can be resolved not through authority, but through reason based on observation, and irrationalists (religious and non-religious alike) insist they have to be faith-based pre-suppositions immune from challenge. There is something on which I agree with the absolutist bible-believers: that there is truth. We just disagree on whether we can personally know it with absolute certainty. There is something with which post-modern irrationalists agree with the absolutist bible-believers: that we can't know anything without retreating to a pre-supposition. But I say that hope lies only in the discovery that we can. True tolerance and fairness under the first amendment means a level playing field in which the claims can be judged against each other, without favoritism. This competition is meant to be fair, but like any competition there is a winner and a loser! Claims are accepted and rejected! But inevitably whoever believes that there exists a knowable reality, and takes sides accordingly, is made out to be the bad guy.

## Comments

---

none
