---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: Marriage According to Church and State
date: 2004-07-12T16:17:00.000Z
tags:
  - relationships
  - polyamory
  - theocracy
  - time travel
  - politics
original_url: 'https://nemorathwald.dreamwidth.org/13434.html'
userpic: ../userpics/_.jpg
---
In my discussions of marriage law (which are frequent) it amazes me to hear gays tell me how conservative they are. You want to hear an irony? Socially, gay-marriage advocates tend to be conservatives who are romanticizing the stone age. By no means is marriage the only thing that can give love dignity. It is not the only way to create a home. I will include this paragraph to illustrate, and just so that you know where I'm coming from, but you can skip it and get to the church/state argument. I used to be married. We didn't get divorced because of not being able to get along, we got along fine. But my ex and I view the videotape of our highly religious wedding and cringe. We ask ourselves, since we don't have any kids and we aren't going to, what's the _point_ of living together? Of having finances in common? Of making extravagant promises to be the "one and only"? Since marriage involved demanding she be with me forever, I considered marriage to be clingy, insecure and possessive. Not to mention it's suffocating from the high expectations, which she discovered first-hand as her feelings stultified under obligation and entitlement. The best thing we ever did to improve our "ho-hum" relationship was get a divorce. Personally, I wouldn't mind getting a domestic partnership with her if it had a built-in expiration renewal date similar to a driver's license. If she wanted another guy, I'd be comfortable about including him in it if I get along with him and if the two of them were fine with that. (Not that she would consent to any of this in a million years, which makes it all academic.) Let me just add here to cover my behind: I'm not saying I'm interested in an adolescent polygamist fantasy about having a harem of babes. I've just never felt jealousy about other men, and I don't harbor disrespect for alternative relationship structures. Side note, some clarification of how I use terms. A "domestic partnership" is the real, de-facto existing relationship and exists in the hearts of the participants no matter what a state or a church say about it. It is sometimes cemented in a ceremony, sometimes religious, which makes it "marriage." The 1,001 legal obligations, rights and recognitions that the state applies to that _after the fact_ I refer to as "civil union" (CU). These are three different things. You can have any, all or none of them. Aren't the parameters of the actual relationship, although mostly consistent in the mainstream, whatever the participants in each domestic partnership make it? Expiration-date threesomes are not currently legally recognized, and leads to the point of all this. The state has made a pre-packaged civil union arrangement which they name marriage in a "take-it-or-leave-it" fashion: the genders have to be different, the number has to be no more than two, and the duration has to be (supposedly) permanent (ha ha). This is religion in government. **That's why** **we should not allow the state to acknowledge ANY relationships with the special designation of "legal marriage," meaning "this relationship is acceptable to the State but that one is not." Instead they should all be "civil unions" in the eyes of the state, and whether or not you're "married" depends entirely on what your church/synagogue/coven says, if any. The state shouldn't even ask about that. In this I include Christian heterosexual weddings and their "gay-inclusive" update.** What business is if of government who you want to be your family member? Marriage, being a ceremonial cementing, should be left to the churches to do privately rather than legally. If that were accomplished, Focus on the Family and the Concerned Housewives of America will call this "the abolition of marriage" (or some such rhetoric) but nobody would be prevented from arranging their civil union as a traditional marriage. It's just that CUs, where the law is concerned, would be custom-designed by each set of partners. It's disappointing that the only response to this from advocates of gay marriage that I've talked to so far, is to say, "we don't support your rights to be domestic partners with multiple people, expiring in three years unless renewed; because equal rights for you is more radical than equal rights for us." I expected GLBTs in general would be sympathetic to the non-religious because they know what the alienation is like. But not so. The reality is that many in the GLBT community right now have lost sight of how the position of gay rights is logically connected to social progressiveness in general. In a bizarre twist, the very traditionalism under which they suffer is somehow perceived as their friend. They tell me they only want what their parents had, as if they expect it to evoke a Kinkade painting. They want to imitate the culture that hates and abuses them. I recall the column in the GLBT newspaper _Between the Lines_ that the gay atheist wrote, lamenting how he gets just as much intolerance from gays for his atheism, as they receive intolerance from the society at large. The sad, bitter irony is that many GLBTs in this country currently don't seem to be taking the lesson we learn from their plight and applying it to the benefit of other despised groups. "Hold on," they say, "all I want is to be married, which is a right you already have." "Not exactly," I reply. "You can't get a domestic partnership on your terms and I can't get it on mine. This is because even if you get it from a judge in civil court, rather than in a church, the terms are still inflexibly set. Who do you think set the tradition? Religionists (and non-religionists who choose THE TRADITIONAL, ONE WAY of domestic partnership) have an easy ride in America when it comes to c.u. You and I have a difference of conscience which should protected under freedom of religion, and want it another way, not THEIR WAY. So don't I also fall outside the privileged class? Don't I, just like you, have to spend a gazillion bucks and months in legal proceedings to set up a non-traditional legal relationship? Making THEIR WAY into this cheap-and-easy class of civil union is the same as placing them in a privileged class over you and I. A privileged class you want entrance to." But I hear gay-marriage activists saying I'm not discriminated against because I can have the 1,001 legal rights of married couples just like the religionists do... if I do civil unions THEIR WAY, the traditional marriage way. The advocates of gay marriage are here using the same argument I've heard from opponents of gay marriage. "Gays currently have equal rights to get married-- to the opposite sex." But you don't have equal rights if you have to do it THEIR ONE WAY or the highway. So, the law does need to change. All domestic partnerships that desire it need to be given access to the 1,001 legal rights of civil union formerly known as marriage. But it needs to change to take traditional marriage down from its exclusive place as an expression of domestic partnership. Even if gays were admitted to the ranks of the marriage-eligible, this club of elitist privilege would still exclude those of us, both gay and straight, who object to traditional marriage as our form of domestic partnership. Gays should still be given legal rights as anyone else, but if we offer only civil unions to everyone, both gay and straight, then we'll have equality.

## Comments

---

**[ext_525847](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_525847)** on Jul. 18, 2004 2:40 AM

I agree with the bold, 100% (as well as the last paragraph). There's a sign I saw at WRAP that I disagree with. I forget exactly what it says, but it lends itself to the idea that separate is not equal, and that if you give gays "civil unions" that it wouldn't be fair. I disagree. Personally, that's what it is I am after. I don't consider myself to be religious, although I do believe in \*some\* higher power of some kind. I think civil unions for all is the way to go. If people want to have a marriage, in whatever church they want, more power to them. That has nothing to do with the legal hassles I have to go through to get the 1001 legal rights, etc. In the next to the last paragraph, I see what you're saying as far as you 'not being able to get \[a D.P.\] on \[your terms\].' What I don't quite understand is what you're referring to as "your terms." Are you saying you want to be married to two separate people (i.e. a 3-way marriage)? Are you saying you want to have a civil union, simply to avoid the religious aspects of (what others may term) a marriage? If this is the case, why not just get "married" by a justice of the peace? This leads me to believe you're arguing for 3-way civil unions, which \*is\* more radical. If there were three sexes of people, there very well likely would be 3-way unions. The problem is that the government doesn't have a way to recognize 3-person unions. I'm not, however, saying 3-way unions shouldn't be legal, just that \*if\* they were to be legal, MANY laws would have to be re-written. The tax code alone would take years to reconfigure. And for the record, I do want what my parents have... a loving, long-term relationship having nothing to do with the church nor religion. :)

---

**[ext_21159](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_21159)** on Jul. 18, 2004 10:55 PM

_What I don't quite understand is what you're referring to as "your terms."_ In reality, since it's all academic I don't actually have any terms myself. Ideally, I wouldn't live with anybody. However, in principle it ought to be permissable for any consenting adults to make each other family members, whoever they are. And however many there are. And for however much of a duration that they set in advance. 3-way, 5-way, 12-way, even a chain of people, Friendster-style. George is married to Mary, who's also married to Bob, who's also married to Jen, who's also married to Larry, who's also married to Sue, who's also married to the first guy George, who's never met Jen. I don't know if it would work, but it's none of my business what people decide works for them in their private relationships. Let's reconfigure the tax laws and all the other laws so that when people go down to the courthouse they are handed a form consisting of multiple-choice questions. And, you're mixing DP, CU and marriage around interchangably. The way I've chosen to define them, the terms are more useful to specify when you're talking about 1) the de-facto relationship such as even co-habitors can have, 2) the piece of paper in a courthouse filing cabinet, or 3) the ceremonial cementing supposedly set up in God's filing cabinet.

---

**[ext_525847](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_525847)** on Jul. 19, 2004 8:04 PM

Actually, I don't think I mixed up DP, CU, and marriage. I said "married" once and (what others may term) once... Anyway, I see your point, but I'll agree to disagree. As far as living with and loving whomever you want, have at it. I don't, however, agree that groups of people should be able to have any legal rights together as spouse and spouse and spouse, etc. I think it can be done with other legal paperwork, but I don't think we should have the structure in place to make it commonplace.

---

**[ext_1485824](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_1485824)** on (None)

