---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: jbocradi 0001
date: 2005-09-16T03:52:00.000Z
tags: 
  - lojban
  - podcasts
original_url: 'https://nemorathwald.dreamwidth.org/83492.html'
userpic: ../userpics/_.jpg
---
Hello, and welcome to the first lojbanic broadcast of the first lojbanic broadcaster! coi .i fi'i do le pa moi jbocradi le pa moi This is a computer audio periodical .i ti skami sance karni for speakers and enthusiasts fo lo tavla je se cinri of Lojban, the logical language. po la lojban po'u le logji bangu September 17, 2005. detri li so pi'e paze pi'e renonomu This episode will feature: Pronouncing "e" Phrasebook part 1 Conlang of the Month Club I'm your host Matt Arnold, mi'e mat.arnold known to the Lojban community as Eppcott. poi la .epkat cmene mi le lojbo cecmu This broadcast gives us an opportunity to hear each other speak Lojban, many of us for the first time. We may be surprised at what we hear! Is it just me, or have you ever had trouble pronouncing e in Lojban when it comes before r? {e} is always to be pronounced "eh", and usually this is easy. But if you're not careful, words like {lerfu} (spelled l-e-r-f-u, meaning "alphabetical character"), {verba} (spelled v-e-r-b-a, meaning "child"), or {kerlo} (spelled k-e-r-l-o, meaning "ear"), sometimes sound like they are spelled {lyrfu}, {vyrba}, {kyrlo}, with the "uh" sound. For that sound, Lojban uses the letter y, and then it wouldn't be a real word. "e" before r might also sound like a syllabic {r} and wouldn't sound like a vowel at all. Is this only a problem for native English-speakers? Personally, to give it enough distinction, I try to pronounce it very closely to the e in "ehr-ror," "A-meh-ri-can," or "eh-ra." {lerfu}, {verba}, {kerlo}, without overpronouncing it or allowing the "ee" sound to creep in at the end of the vowel. Again, slurring vowels is possibly an English language phenomenon since most other languages tend to pronouce pure vowels. What do you think? Phrasebook Part 1: Simple Phrases. A new sentence in Lojban is begun with the word {.i}. How do you say "yes" in Lojban in response to a true-or-false question? .i go'i a pronoun which stands for the last thing that was said; go'i "yes" How do you say "no" in Lojban in response to a true-or-false question? .i na go'i "no" na go'i Please. .i pe'u do "please" pe'u "please" Thank you. .i ki'e do "thank you" ki'e "thanks" Thank you very much. .i ki'e sai do "thank you very much" ki'e sai "thanks very much" That's all right/You're welcome .i je'e do "you're welcome" je'e do "you're welcome" I love you. .i mi prami do "I love you" prami "love" When someone is using a vaccuum cleaner during a Lojban podcast, you say {cladu}, "LOUD"! It's preferable during a Lojban podcast to have {smaji\], "quiet." Jeffrey Henning's blog entry of August 23 on Langmaker.com titled "Conlang of the Month Club" suggested that enthusiasts pick one constructed language to study and use in October for 15 minutes a day. Lojban was among the suggested languages, and of course on jbocradi we want that to be your choice. But then Henning posed a question that stumped me. There is something the listed conlangs have in common that the conlangs Henning excluded lack. What is it? Here is the list: Esperanto, Ido, Interlingua, Interlingue, Klingon, Lojban, Toki Pona or Volapük. Again, there is something the listed conlangs have in common that the conlangs Henning excluded lack. What is it? If Henning reveals the answer next month, I'll include it in our next broadcast. In the meantime, go to Langmaker.com and submit your guess! This episode was brought to you by the following gismu: prami x1 loves x2 cladu x1 is loud or noisy at observation point x2 by standard x3 smaji x1 is quiet, silent or still at observation point x2 by standard x3 And by the following cmavo: go'i yes pe'u please ki'e thank you je'e you're welcome Your participation is welcomed! Please e-mail new material, questions, or corrections to the Lojban main mailing list at lojban-list@lojban.org. For more information, see the Lojban website at www.lojban.org. Thanks for downloading Lojban radio. Til' next time, this is epkat saying, co'o !

## Comments

---

none
