---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: '2007 in review, part 2'
date: 2007-12-28T05:38:00.000Z
tags: 
  - podcasts
  - penguicon
  - lojban
original_url: 'https://nemorathwald.dreamwidth.org/197949.html'
userpic: ''
---
Part two of 2007 in review is projects. I simply stopped contributing to [the Sci Phi Show](http://thesciphishow.com/) podcast. I'm not trying to be hostile by saying this, but the plain fact is it was excruciating to have to listen to any part of the show that I wasn't involved in. I had looked to the model of Abbott and Costello, who produced something successful even though they disliked each other off stage. And yet, Abbott and Costello must have liked the product they made together. The lesson I learned is that there's no point trying to contribute to a product you hate. You can't redeem something by your participation, if you consider your collaborator's contribution to be destroying the worth of the product. The people who listen are his audience, not mine, and they don't mind if I leave. My audience doesn't listen because the content provided by the host is a waste of their time. I also realized [Changesurfer Radio](http://ieet.org/index.php/IEET/csr) is everything I ever wanted from The Sci Phi Show and more. I committed a lot more to [Penguicon](http://penguicon.org), even taking over a lot of positions in which jobs are not currently being done and replacements are not currently being assigned. The passive voice was also learned. By me. Dropped work is being delegated among the extremely dedicated core team, which is more than I can say for previous years. So, don't worry-- we're in better shape for 2008, not worse. I was also elected Conchair for 2009. I took the job to shore up the weaknesses of the convention in which I am strong, and because I have people who I trust completely to do the things in which I am weak. So I'm confident it's all covered. The convention committee for 2009 is 90% selected for next year, although I'm still accepting applications. I hand-picked a core team for the early-planning process of , , , , each with their focus on an early-planning area, and all headed up by . It's amazing what a world of opportunity opens up with eighteen month advance notice. I won't say too much about it until closing ceremonies in order to avoid overshadowing this year. Watching it go so smoothly, I'm convinced this early start is vital, and I have my replacement conchair lined up for 2010. At the same time I experienced something toward ConFusion and Lojban activity which I eventually recognized must be what burnout feels like. A couple of weeks ago, I was nominated to be President of the Logical Language Group. I sent an email, not to be hostile, but as a sort of explanation why they shouldn't elect me. A sort of inverted campaign speech, just to make it clear how my attitudes and aptitudes toward leadership changed while I had been away. I said I would not decline, but they probably should not elect me. I declared myself "contemptuous of bylaws ... sublimely indifferent to Robert's Rules of Order." "They way I work is to talk to the stakeholders, make sure everybody understands each other, and then do it." Then I made snarky game-theory comparison of Boards of Directors to Polyamory, which deserves its own blog post. I then defended this attitude toward proceduralism on grounds of what happened to Penguicon when I "rode into Dodge City" guns blazing. I bragged like I have never bragged before, despite the fact that the Board of Directors and Concom really deserve the credit. The point of the boasting was to say that if this attitude is duplicated for spreading the Lojban language, that can reap the same huge benefits. Then I said I would refuse to take any actual action toward the LLG Presidency until I was done with chairing Penguicon in May 2009. I promised a year and a half of continued inactivity! How's that for a campaign promise?

> So, although I would accept the Presidency of the Logical Language Group Board of Directors, I would not actually do it justice until May of 2009. At that time, if elected, I would proceed to make Lojban succeed in an agressive manner guaranteed to upset somebody. If anyone cries dictator the way they did with Lojbab so many years ago, too bad-- it won't hurt my feelings one bit. They can impeach me, and I've lost nothing, but at least somebody tried. Or they can leave, and I'll recruit to replace them. Or they can actually get off their butts. Lead, follow, or get out of the way. On the other hand, if the decision is to continue failing, I am content. At least until May 2009.

Oh my god, the effect of saying the phrase 'hedge trimmers to bylaws' on nitpicky Lojbanists is fun to watch. Pretty harsh, in retrospect. To sum up, (A) When I'm not going to do anything, I am very proud of the fact that I say so loudly and repeatedly (B) I'm not going to push motivational energy upwards on the authority chain in _any_ organization; I am burned out with do-nothings and obstructionists to the point that I've got nothing to lose by bluntness (C) The results are awesome and fun and exciting to participate in. It's fun to lead, follow, or get out of the way! I'm on a warpath regarding pretty much all my volunteerism and I intend to either go on a warpath with Lojban, or not bother leading the Logical Language Group to continue to fail in its clear mandate. "Nobody will elect their own drill sergeant", I thought. It was unanimous. I'm LLG President.

## Comments

---

**[ext_526758](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_526758)** on Dec. 28, 2007 9:46 PM

"I then defended this attitude toward proceduralism on grounds of what happened to Penguicon when I "rode into Dodge City" guns blazing. I bragged like I have never bragged before, despite the fact that the Board of Directors and Concom really deserve the credit." It's OK, you deserved the gloat. But it's nice to have our mostly-humble Matt back :-D

---

**[ext_119840](https://www.dreamwidth.org/users/ext_119840)** on Dec. 31, 2007 3:47 PM

Well, I suppose it's really nice when they realize that they need their own drill sergeant and beg you to smack them into shape.
