---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: Terraformers of Catan
date: 2010-07-01T18:57:00.000Z
tags: []
original_url: 'https://nemorathwald.dreamwidth.org/325817.html'
userpic: ../userpics/_.jpg
---
This variant has adjustable dice (a deck of cards), adjustable target numbers, adjustable price menus, and hexes that can be adjusted to produce multiple resources. Play Settlers of Catan as normal except for the following differences. Seven is not a special number. A sum of seven does not allow the player to steal from another player, or anything to happen to the thief token. **Setup** Use two hexes of each type of resource (wood, brick, wheat, sheep, ore) and eight deserts. To get extra deserts, flip over hexes to show the blank sides. Use only the target number chips bearing 2, 3, 5, and 6, three of each. If you have only one Settlers set, add some target number chips that you write on paper. Place them on resource hexes. Place a blank or upside-down chip on each desert hex. Instead of the dice, use a deck of cards with numbers on them. UNO cards will do, or draw your own. This is called the Production Deck, and the cards not currently in use are called the Production Supply. The Production Supply contains cards of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Take nine cards from the Production Supply, three each of 1, 2, and 3, and shuffle them. This is the game's starting Production Deck. Setup is complete. Turn Sequence. Step 1. Terraforming Take a target number chip off a hex and replace it with a chip bearing a number one higher. Twelve is the highest that a hex can get. Step 2. Production Draw two cards from the Production deck. When you need to draw, but only one or zero cards remain in the Production Deck, draw the one card if there is one. Shuffle the discard pile to become the new Production Deck. Draw the remaining card or cards from it. This draw results in Production just like the two dice in normal Settlers. Any two cards drawn from this beginning deck will add up to the number 4 twice as often as any other sum. At the start of the game, there are no target number fours on the board-- only blanks, twos, threes, fives, and sixes. After production is resolved, the two drawn Production cards are put in the Production Discard pile. Any time that the sum of the drawn cards does not exist as a target number on the board, each player must discard resources until they have the same number of cards as the sum shown on the drawn cards. Any time you do not receive any resources from a Production draw, you may move one of your Settlements to an adjacent empty intersection. Staying two segments apart is a rule that applies to building, not moving. You may move along your roads, or no roads, but not along the roads of others. You may move to an intersection in between another player's roads. Step 3. Trading and Building Additional Building Options: To take a new card from the Production Supply and add it to the Production Discard pile, pay the same number of resource cards as the number on the new Production card. If the Production Deck, Production Discard, and the two drawn cards, contain at least seven cards, pay one of each type of resource to return one of the discard, and return it to the Production Supply. **Development Cards** The Development cards are completely different from normal Settlers. Ignore their text. Playing the Soldier Development card allows you to move the Thief token (or add it to the board if it is not in the game yet). While a hex contains the Thief token, its target number is reduced by 1. Playing a Development card which normally bears a victory point (Library, University of Catan, Market, Governor's House, Chapel) allows you to alter your own price menu. You may choose which resource to alter and what to alter it to. For example, you may change a sheep to a wheat in the cost of a Settlement so that a Settlement costs you (and you alone) 1 wood, 1 brick, and 2 wheat. Cover a resource on your price menu with a colored chip that you drew with a marker, or use the barrels from Puerto Rico (light brown tobacco=wood, white sugar=sheep, dark brown coffee=brick, yellow corn=wheat, blue indigo=ore). The new price takes effect in this building phase, if you wish to continue building. Playing any other Development card (Road Building, Year of Plenty, Monopoly) allows you to add a resource token (the Puerto Rico barrels or your own chips) to a hex, which gives you the choice to produce that resource from that hex instead of the one it may normally produce. A hex may not have a token of the same type of resource as the hex, nor may it have two of the same token. Desert hexes can produce resources if you place a resource token on them and enough cubes to form a target number that is hit by the Production draw.

## Comments

---

none
